feat(blog-post): Introducing Whirlwind Chat (#2728)
mainmatter/mainmatter.com: src/posts/2025-05-31-introducing-whirlwind.md

Reviewer: Let's update the date to today

---

> title: "Whirlwind Chat: Learnings behind building a P2P video chat in browser"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Whirlwind Chat: Learnings from building a browser-based P2P video chat"
```

authorHandle: BobrImperator
tags: [rust, svelte, webrtc]
bio: "Bartlomiej Dudzik, Software Developer"

> description: "A technical overview of Whirlwind Chat: P2P browser video chat, learnings behind it and a look at the more interesting bits."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "A technical overview of Whirlwind Chat: learnings from building a browser-based P2P video chat."
```

autoOg: true

> tagline: <p>Lessons learned and decisions made behind Whirlwind Chat and its structure.</p>

Reviewer: This should really be the first paragraph of the post. I'd explain what Whirlwind is in 1-2 sentences to give people context as well.

image: "/assets/images/posts/2025-05-31-introducing-whirlwind/whirlwind-visual.jpg"
imageAlt: "Smiling and waving geometric shape folks swept by a whirlwind."
---

# Whirlwind Chat: peer-to-peer video chat in the browser for hybrid events

The goal of this blog post is to provide a technical overview for a video chat application [Whirlwind Chat](https://whirlwind.chat/) which we've made, as well as give an insight into some of the more interesting parts and the intentions behind them.

## Why Whirlwind Chat exists?

> Spontaneous one-on-one conversations are still hard to replicate at online events. We built [Whirlwind Chat](https://whirlwind.chat/) to make that easier. It's a simple app for short, peer-to-peer video chats. You join a group then get matched with others for 2-minute conversations.

Reviewer: I think this should be the start of the post.

> If you're more interested in how Whirlwind Chat works as a product for events, check out our [case study on using Whirlwind Chat at hybrid meetups](/cases/whirlwind).

Reviewer: can use the above:

```suggestion
This post is to provide a technical overview for a video chat application [Whirlwind Chat](https://whirlwind.chat/) which we've made, as well as give an insight into some of the more interesting parts and the intentions behind them.
```

Reviewer: I'd also add a screenshot here so people can imagine what this app looks like and how it works.

## The core: Rust, SvelteKit, and WebRTC

Whirlwind Chat has two parts: a web app written in Svelte, and a backend server written in Rust. The frontend runs entirely in the browser and handles video calls using WebRTC. The backend coordinates users, manages sessions, and helps peers connect.

The actual video and audio data never touch our servers. Everything flows directly between browsers using peer-to-peer connections. This approach improves privacy (no server sits in the middle watching calls) and it makes Whirlwind Chat scalable to a large number of users with minimal infrastructure.

## The backend

> The backend is written in Rust using [Axum](https://docs.rs/axum/latest/axum/) which is somewhat split into two parts: The web server and a Supervisor that takes care of spawning session servers as they’re requested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The backend is written in [Rust](/rust-consulting/) using [Axum](https://docs.rs/axum/latest/axum/) which is somewhat split into two parts: The web server and a Supervisor that takes care of spawning session servers as they’re requested.
```

It also relies on PostgreSQL as a persistence layer for user records and the Cloudflare Realtime service which provides TURN servers for WebRTC.

The web server handles:

- HTTP API and Websocket connections
- Session servers spawning

Session servers are responsible for:

> - matchmaking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- matchmaking and keeping track of previous matches
```

- managing real-time user states like “readiness”

> - exchanging messages between users in that group

Reviewer: I'd add these messages are for establishing the WebRTC connections, otherwise it can be confusing

Lobby servers don’t run always, instead they’re spawned on-demand as users join a lobby for the first time and later they’re shutdown after some period of time when a lobby is considered inactive.

Additionally we take advantage of that fact to make a request to fetch STUN/TURN server configuration to [Cloudflare Realtime API](https://developers.cloudflare.com/realtime/) before a Lobby wakes up. That is because STUN/TURN server configuration must be shipped to the end users, but making a hardcoded, long lived configuration could easily allow somebody to use our Cloudflare service. So instead the credentials are generated per-server.

Another function of a Supervisor is to provide an access to the internal state of a given lobby. We rely on this mechanism internally for owner actions which are regular HTTP calls instead and not WebSocket messages. This helps with avoiding re-implementing request/response and authentication mechanisms in a WebSocket connection, ultimately making things simpler by relying on the already coined practices around HTTP authentication.

> The Supervisor isn’t very sophisticated though and doesn’t attempt to restart a Lobby once it crashes. Instead if a Lobby or any of its child tasks encounter an unrecoverable error, the Lobby is shutdown immediately, while not great, it’s still an annoyance at best.

Reviewer: I guess this could be left out – it's essentially just saying there's an open TODO but we can easily not mention it at all.

![Server structure quick overview](/assets/images/posts/2025-05-31-introducing-whirlwind/server-structure.png)

> ### InMemory

Reviewer: This is coming a bit out of the blue. Without showing code, nobody knows what `InMemory` is at all. I'd rephrase this maybe to not talk about particular code elements but say we're storing session state in memory, etc.

By itself it can't interact with the rest of the system or users however. In order to handle that the Websocket spawns more tasks and channels. It creates a `mailbox` and forwards the writer side of it to the `InMemory` so the `InMemory` module and other users have the ability to push messages to that user who owns the receiving side of `mailbox`. It also creates a `queue` channel - once a message reaches the channel it's read by the `sender` task which pushes that message to the client. The `queue` collects messages from other sources like the `mailbox` and `receiver`.

Messages sent to a user are generally either a result of their direct actions like sending a `Ready` message or indirect like somebody joining to the Lobby, in that case user will receive a `LobbyStatus` message originating from the session server.

![Websocket communication flow](/assets/images/posts/2025-05-31-introducing-whirlwind/websocket-overview.png)

### Testing

Whirlwind Chat is an application where 90% of the work and functionality happens in the Websockets.

> As such it requires a different testing approach that’s more similar to testing `Evented systems` rather than an `HTTP API`.

Reviewer: The backticks are confusing here. You want code formatting for code, e.g. module or function names, not technical terms in general. The patter continues below.

> First of all, the test setup actually runs our Server by binding it to a random port with its own database and configuration on a test by test basis - making sure everything is isolated, concurrent and fast. It also works great when testing different configurations of various `matchmaking` task settings.

Reviewer 2: Each test runs a full server instance, bound to a random port with its own database and configuration. This keeps tests isolated, allows them to run in parallel, and supports custom matchmaking configurations.

(Also no need for blockquote around matchmaking, unless its a specific Rust keyword?)

> The test suite essentially uses `Black Box testing` approach. Our tests define and make use of a stateful `Interactions` module. The `Interactions` module is a test helper that defines methods that make _real_ HTTP calls (not mocked), and uses `tokio_tungstenite` to make a real Websocket connection to the server, so it can act as a real user using their browser. `Interactions` also stores received messages for inspection, which helps with keeping tests fast and accurate by making sure it’s OK to receive different messages while we’re waiting for a specific one; since messages are unordered by nature and the client might receive a `UserStatus` message in between awaiting an `IceAnswer` message.

Reviewer 2: The test suite follows a black-box approach. Tests use an `Interactions` module, which makes real HTTP requests (not mocks) and connects to the server using `tokio_tungstenite` (note: can this be a link to a library?) to simulate a real user session.

The `Interactions` module stores all received messages for later inspection. This improves reliability, since messages can arrive out of order. For example, a `UserStatus` message might appear while we are waiting for an `IceAnswer`. By collecting all messages, the test can verify outcomes without depending on timing.

Reviewer 2: - What do we want?
- Now!
- A way to process asynchronous messages chronologically without having to account for clock drift!
- And when do we want it?!

## The frontend

> We used [SvelteKit](https://svelte.dev/docs/kit/introduction) for the frontend. It's a good fit for reactive UIs while keeping bundle size to minimum. (At Mainmatter, [we like Svelte and SvelteKit](https://mainmatter.com/svelte-consulting/) because they strike the right balance between developer productivity and building lightweight, performant web apps.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We used [SvelteKit](https://svelte.dev/docs/kit/introduction) for the frontend. It's a good fit for reactive UIs while keeping bundle size to minimum. (At Mainmatter, [we like Svelte and SvelteKit](/svelte-consulting/) because they strike the right balance between developer productivity and building lightweight, performant web apps.)
```

The hard part wasn't building the interface, it was making it work reliably across all the different browsers, devices, and hardware users bring. Some users join from phones, others from dual-screen desktops. Microphones and cameras vary. Permission prompts behave differently across OS/browser combinations.

> We also had to handle stream negotiation, dynamic device selection, and failure cases where the camera or microphone is missing, in use elsewhere, or blocked. An optional background blur feature added one more layer of complexity by having to juggle multiple video streams and elements, which is more tricky than it sounds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also had to handle stream negotiation, dynamic device selection, and failure cases where the camera or microphone is missing, is in use elsewhere, or blocked. An optional background blur feature added one more layer of complexity by having to juggle multiple video streams and elements, which is more tricky than it sounds.
```

![WebRTC overview](/assets/images/posts/2025-05-31-introducing-whirlwind/webrtc-overview.png)

### Background blur with Tensorflow

> While integrating Tensorflow (BodyPix) is pretty easy, there are some tricky parts in context of a video call and WebRTC though.

Reviewer 2: To power the background blur feature, we use [TensorFlow.js](https://www.tensorflow.org/js) together with its [BodyPix](https://github.com/tensorflow/tfjs-models/tree/master/body-pix) model. BodyPix is a machine learning model that runs entirely in the browser. It performs real-time person segmentation, which means it can identify which parts of the video are the person and which are the background. This makes it possible to blur the background while keeping the speaker in focus.

While integration was relatively straightforward, applying it to a real-time video call presented a few challenges in the context of WebRTC.

Reviewer: I'd add an image or so to make clear what this is about. This comes out of the blue with no real context.

- The person segmentation model is quite heavy and ideally is sideloaded
- Video processing is pretty heavy on CPU and so we needed a way to limit how often segmentation runs using `requestAnimationFrame` and then limit it further by pegging it to the video stream fps by counting how much time has elapsed between draws. Current frequency is `1000ms / 30fps` .
- It requires swapping out a `video` element with a `canvas` element when blur is toggled on. Video element must be kept in the background and overlayed with `canvas` because it’s still the video camera and audio source.

> - Video processing sometimes throws errors that’d typically stop blur from functioning. When that happens, we’re restarting the process.

Reviewer 2: - The person segmentation model is large, so we sideload it instead of bundling it directly into the app.  
- Video processing uses a lot of CPU, so we limit how often segmentation runs using `requestAnimationFrame`. We also throttle it further by aligning it with the frame rate of the video stream. Right now, it runs at most once every 33 milliseconds, which matches 30 frames per second.  
- When blur is enabled, we overlay a canvas element on top of the video feed. The video element stays in the background because it still provides the camera and microphone stream.  
- Sometimes, video processing fails and breaks the blur feature. When that happens, we restart the process to recover automatically.

> The last tricky part we’ve had to solve was making sure which video track needs to be sent to the Peer without overly complicating things by having to send additional metadata. While WebRTC has a `replaceTrack` API, we learned quickly that when called too often, WebRTC would stop transmitting any video. The fix was to debounce the blur functionality, but finding the answer wasn’t so obvious at the time.

Reviewer 2: One of the hardest problems was deciding which video track to send to the peer. We wanted to avoid adding extra metadata to describe the current stream. WebRTC provides a `replaceTrack` API, but calling it too frequently can cause the connection to stop transmitting video. To avoid that, we debounce the blur toggle (i.e. wait briefly before applying the change) so that track switching only happens once the user has made a final decision.

> ### Detecting whether video is being sent

Reviewer 2: "Detecting when a video stream stops working" feels a bit clearer and intriguing to me, but up to you!

> This was probably our most favorite piece of the puzzle. WebRTC doesn’t provide any off the shelf API that could quickly tell that there’s likely a problem with the connection and a video stream is stuck for our Peer. We can see our camera feed OK but the person on the other end might not see us.

Reviewer 2: This was one of our favorite challenges. WebRTC does not provide a simple API to tell whether the connection is working and video is actually being delivered to the peer. You can see your own camera feed just fine, but the person on the other end might not be receiving anything.

Luckily, WebRTC does provide statistics for the transceiver that takes care of receiving and sending the data. It’s possible to call `getStats` on `RTCPeerConnection` instance, select a “report” for `video` channel and using `report.framesReceived` property, begin to count how many times we’ve received less than a certain amount of frames in that second. If it keeps dropping frames for roughly 10 seconds, we’ll call `restartIce` on the WebRTC connection to make clients renegotiate their connection.

This mechanism works great for situations where:

- Peers are not sending data to one another
- Peers are using incompatible codecs

> - The internet connection quality has dropped or switched from wifi to mobile data.

Reviewer 2: Luckily, WebRTC does provide connection statistics through the `getStats` method on the `RTCPeerConnection` object. We use this to monitor the video channel and look at the `framesReceived` count in each report. If the number of frames received stays low for several seconds, we assume the connection is stalled and we call `restartIce` to force renegotiation between peers. This often fixes problems caused by codec mismatches, connection drops, or switching networks during a call.

> ## Give it a try

Reviewer: This will be in the CTA

---
title: "Whirlwind: Learnings behind building a P2P video chat"
authorHandle: BobrImperator
tags: [rust, svelte, webrtc]
bio: "Bartlomiej Dudzik, Software Developer"
description: "A technical overview of Whirlwind: P2P browser video chat, learnings behind it and a look at the more interesting bits."
autoOg: true
tagline: <p>Lessons learned behind Whirlwind and its structure.</p>

image: "/assets/images/posts/2025-05-31-introducing-whirlwind/header.png"
imageAlt: "Smiling and waving geometric shape folks with Whirlwind in between."
---

# Whirlwind: peer-to-peer video chat in the browser for hybrid events

> The goal of this blog post is to provide a technical overview for a video chat application [Whirlwind](https://whirlwind.chat/) which we’ve made, as well as give an insight into some of the more interesting parts and the intentions behind them.

Author: This is now changed and the suggestion doesn't work anymore

---

> title: "Whirlwind: Meet everyone in 2-minute, 1-on-1 video chats"

Reviewer 2: I still think it should say "in the browser" or something. Finding a title for this announcement is quite tricky :/
